Indicators for detection of abusive digital lenders.

Context
Data sources available
Methodology
Overview of Indicators
Deep dive of select indicators
Permission Analysis
3rd Party Provider analysis.
App Metadata Analysis.
3rd Party Digital infrastructures for lending
LoanApps Database Generator

1
1
1
5
9
9
11
12
13
15

Context
Digital lending is growing rapidly and along with the growth there has been a noticeable rise
in consumer harms. These harms arise due to a variety of factors such as regulatory void on
upcoming technology and data use in the financial sector, digital literacy, financial literacy
leading to exploitative practices and suboptimal outcomes such as eroding consumer trust.
Identification of abusive practices to overcome the harms hence becomes a key issue
towards a common good for everyone in the ecosystem. This brief aims at documenting a
list of indicators to spot abusive digital lenders from publicly available metadata around
digital loan apps.

Data sources available
1. Google Play - Source metadata about apps by country, metadata about each app,
their permissions, reviews, etc.
2. List of 3rd party providers offering services to digital lenders.

Methodology
1. Fetch list of loan apps from Google Play FINANCE category in the country (e.g.
Nigeria), search results in Google Play store for popular search terms and similar
apps. This could also be used to run for any country and get a list of loan apps.

Screenshot of script
2. Fetch app metadata including the permissions data for all apps from the above list.
a. Following are the various attributes available for a given app as metadata,
along with some notes
Attribute

Text

ID

Unique ID for the record

Title

Title of the app

Description

Description

DescriptionHTML

Description in HTML

Notes

Summary

Summary of the app

installs

Installs as displayed on
Google Play

maxInstalls

Install data is gameable with bot downloads
for higher listing in search, doesn't represent
actual user base as users may have installed,
Minimum Installs
but never used / installed via other app stores
Approx * Maximum Installs / sideloaded.

score

Weighted average of
ratings

scoreText

Rounded off score
displayed to user

ratings

Total number of users who
rated

1*

1 Star

2*

2 Star

3*

3 Star

4*

4 Star

5*

5 Star

price

For paid apps

IsFree

Free/Paid filter

currency

Currency for app pricing

minInstalls

Ratings and reviews are gameable too,
usually are gamed widely across apps.

0 for non-free, 1 for Free. Most apps are
usually free.

FreeText

In App Purchase

In app purchase - with
GPlay payment support
options

Size

App Size

androidVersion

Minimum Android API
level

androidVersionText

Textual android version
support note

Developer

Name of Developer

Developer ID

Developer ID

Developer Email

Developer Email

developerWebsite

Developer Website

developerInternalID

Internal ID of developer in
Google Play

0 for no IAP, 1 for IAP Supported. Most apps
don't use IAP

Screenshot of permissions table of the database
3. Additionally perform malware analysis on the app to list the communicating servers
to build a 3rd party provider database of loan apps.
a. Single app takes 15-20 minutes to manually go through the data (scope for
automating this process but this would then still need to be analysed).
b. Indicative list of third parties in India, identified after malware analysis of loan
apps. Constant monitoring of apps to identify vendor supply chain is key to
mapping the support ecosystem and spot bad actors early on.

4. Analyse the above data for indicators to spot potentially harmful lenders.

Overview of Indicators

1. Brand, Advertising – Trademark violation, phishing. Automatable, with some
manual review
● From a consumer standpoint, the first interaction with a lender is through
advertising and brand awareness at the app store / mobile ad / offline ad
about the lending app. While disproportionate spend on marketing is a flag for
the consumer, a trustable brand differentiates itself by providing the
commitment to customer, while most apps that try to gain trust by
piggybacking themselves with other established brands by similar sounding
names, trademarks are an early red flag indicator.
● E.g:- CashTM (PayTM font, colour scheme, maybe trademark highjack)
● Excessive App Store Optimisation (ASO) - CashBean1 (IN) –
com.loan.cash.credit.easy.dhan.quick.udhaar.lend.game.jaldi.paisa.borrow.ru
pee.play.kredit
○ A similar ASO strategy being practised in Nigeria by KashCredit 2 indicates re-use of same playbook / possibly same actors.
Actors are using the same playbook, but it may also be the same actors.
2. App Metadata
●

●

●

●

Release date - Analysis of metadata from Google Play / other app stores
could indicate if the app predates the legal entity which owns the app. In the
real world, most apps get built after a legal entity is formed and exceptions to
this rule are a high risk indicator that the app is run by anonymous /
unidentified, potentially rogue actors. This could be automated by extracting
and comparing the release date from Google Play and an incorporation date
from a third party database.
Developer email ID - This also indicates if the same entity owns the app / if
the app is vendor managed / other partnership structures. Due diligence on
entity data from these can help consumers spot rogue lenders.
○ It may be possible to scrape companies data, to find out who is behind
the apps, but it varies country to country. Also company registration
process/scrutiny/process different across countries.
Privacy policy - The language of privacy policy and terms and conditions can
also be used as indicators. While more often than not, these are legalese
boilerplate texts, the rogue lending apps, don’t host them on their domains
and use Google docs / other static web hosting to host these pages.
○ Non-domain hosted privacy policies e.g. gDocs, are more suspect.
Public presence - Website of the apps, their professionalism (Sites have
unlinked / missing pages) is also a good proxy indicator if a loan app is run by
a trustable entity / rogue lender.
○ Many sites have standard templates, and sometimes don’t change the
default settings, e.g. default privacy policy.

1

RBI cancels Certificate of Registration of PC Financial Services | Economy News | Zee News CashBean’s parent entity was barred from digital lending after consumer conduct / money laundering
incidents.
2

https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.kashkash.fastmoney.lending.easypay.branch.insta
nt.creditcard.quickonline.loanapp.nigeria

3. Physical Presence
● Address - The address information in the app metadata can be used to
identify if the entity has a physical presence in the country, supports
communication with users in local language, complies with regulations, has a
legally responsible point of contact for grievance handling. While some
jurisdictions do allow partnership structures without need for physical
presence, increasingly physical presence is being mandated for overseas
apps.
4. Cyber Hygiene
● Cyber Hygiene broadly refers to the tech practices by the provider and this
could indicate if consumers are protected in the digital world. Frequency of
app updates can be a useful proxy indicator for product increments / iterative
market feedback and a stale app (any more older than 90 days) is a red flag.
This could indicate an outsourced or lack of active technical team, increasing
susceptibility to platform breakdowns or cyber threats.
● Infrastructure upgrades & responsiveness to cyber incidents are also
useful indicators of having made right investments into technology operations
and that assures consumers of dealing with an entity that is respectful /
concerned about user-data. These could be assessed using threat-intel
repositories like VirusTotal.com etc
5. 3rd Parties
● 3rd parties - A digital lender might outsource one / more / all functions to a
range of 3rd parties that include tech intermediaries like KYC providers, data
providers, payment processors and operational intermediaries like sales /
recovery operations.
○ With additional time and manual investigation, areas to explore
include:
■ Which 3rd parties are the go-to for predatory apps?
■ What is the cyber hygiene of 3rd parties?
○ Add list of 3rd party providers for India. The following is a list of 3rd
parties identified in loan apps in India that were in use in 2021.
Steps

Service

Providers

Customer
acquisition

Targeted ads via different channels

Google, Facebook, Youtube, Rummy sites,
Ad SDKs

KYC and Fraud Checks for ID verification and facial
check
recognition

IDfy (India), Hyperverge (US),
Advance.ai (China), DeepFinch
(China), Veri5Digital (India), Link Face
(China)

Risk scoring

Capture mobile and personal data to
score borrowers

Credit Vidya (Indian), Tongdun (China),
Flashcloud (China), Epoch (China), Risk
Cloud (China) Juicy Score (Russia),
Fintopia (China), Zhenrongbao CN

Plug into banking APIs to disburse
Loan disbursal money into borrowers' account

Finflux (Indian)

Loan
management

Help manage the loan lifecycle

Finflux (Indian), Perfios (Indian)

Loan servicing

Integrate with SMS providers to remind
about due dates
Kaleyra (US), Twilio (American),

Integrate with payment gateways to
Loan collection collect money from borrowers

Razorpay (Indian), Cashfree (Indian)

Digital Loan
collection

Flashcloud (China),

Collection bots that make automated
calls to overdue borrowers

○

●

Analysis of data practices and cyber hygiene of 3rd parties is a useful
indicator of the potential to cause unintended consumer harm.
Whitelabel providers - Analysis of apps can also indicate use of whitelabel
providers and tracking history of whitelabel providers can also indicate
structural harms that have happened in the past and how it was handled.

6. App Features (mostly manual, with some automation)
● App permissions give a broad overview of the capabilities the lender is
interested in and mapping of these across ecosystems can indicate if a lender
is too pesky on data / wants more control on the borrower.
○ A strict
○ In Nigeria, apps used 16 permissions on average, but some lenders
had up to 40 permissions. A script could be written to extract and
summarise key statistics.
○ Summary if possible
● Clear UX - Consent on data use is non-negotiable for a responsible lender.
Additionally, clear terms of repayment should be disclosed upfront.
● Document trail - Email / SMS - multi-channel documentation delivery.
● Background activity - Apps with high background activity may be constantly
pushing data from the phone to the app’s servers. This should require explicit
consumer consent that is comprehensible, inclusive of data harms of such
collected data.
7. Responsiveness
○ CRM - Whether apps are actively responding to customer reviews or
complaints can be codified on lender responsiveness. This could be
automated via review of Google Play data.
○ Social media - Similarly, one could analyse checking an app’s
responsiveness via social media channels. While this currently requires
manual review, this could be automated via social media / sentiment analysis.

Deep dive of select indicators
1. Permission Analysis
1. While most apps use a common set of permissions for various reasons ranging from
KYC to credit assessment to liveness detection, there have been apps that use
excessive permissions either for data grab / constant post-loan surveillance / control
of the device.
2. Derive insights on least used permissions, most used permissions and map it against
stated / unstated use of such permissions to analyse the possibility of harm.

Example :-

1. Of the 100+ apps in Nigeria identified as lending app in Nigeria, following is a list of
popular permissions used by the app.
read the contents of your USB storage

116

modify or delete the contents of your USB storage

116

read phone status and identity

116

view network connections

116

full network access

116

prevent device from sleeping

103

view Wi-Fi connections

96

take pictures and videos

95

precise location (GPS and network-based)

86

read your contacts

85

approximate location (network-based)

84

find accounts on the device

80

control vibration

60

connect and disconnect from Wi-Fi

57

read your text messages (SMS or MMS)

53

run at startup

47

read calendar events plus confidential information

34

add or modify calendar events and send email to guests without owners' knowledge

24

pair with Bluetooth devices

23

modify your contacts

21

modify system settings

21

record audio

17

change network connectivity

17

read your own contact card

16

receive text messages (SMS)

15

draw over other apps

15

directly call phone numbers

15

control flashlight

15

access extra location provider commands

15

retrieve running apps

12

read Google service configuration

12

access USB storage filesystem

12

access Bluetooth settings

11

read battery statistics

8

read your Web bookmarks and history

7

reorder running apps

6

read sensitive log data

6

read call log

5

control Near Field Communication

5

change your audio settings

5

set an alarm

4

send sticky broadcast

4

create accounts and set passwords

4

allow Wi-Fi Multicast reception

4

use accounts on the device

3

read sync settings

3

measure app storage space

2

change system display settings

2

add or remove accounts

2

Google Play license check

2

toggle sync on and off

1

read terms you added to the dictionary

1

make/receive SIP calls

1

disable your screen lock

1

close other apps

1

add words to user-defined dictionary

1

●

●

read your Web bookmarks and history for instance is an excessive permission, but is being
used by at least 7 apps. But this was cited in an IMF paper as a novel way in using new types
of information for credit assessment.
add or modify calendar events and send email to guests without owners' knowledge Apps doing *anything* without the knowledge of the owner of the device, especially modifying
calendar events is cause for concern. Specific usage of this permission needs to be studied in
the local context.

2. 3rd Party Provider analysis.

1. A digital lending app integrates multiple 3rd parties which a lender might prefer to
outsource the operations. It is also possible, for whitelabel provider - who manages a
service offering such as “Lending App as a service” to any investor wanting to be
present in the market.
2. The behaviour and customer experience of a lending app is also a function of customer
experience of these individual outsourced components that is part of the offering.
3. The analysis of third party providers can give useful indicators on size of market outside of
Google Play, number of apps and operators who have numerous apps based on the same
template of 3rd party providers.
4. Analysing data flows can also determine the data-power differentials in the ecosystem and if
3rd parties can become powerful rent-seeking intermediaries and in some cases, actually be
in the digital lending industry by publicly posing as 3rd parties to avoid liabilities.
a. Advance.AI is a global facial recognition based KYC provider operating in multiple
markets and has been building a private facial recognition based credit score product.
Given the governance void around facial recognition and data protection in many of
the markets they operate, a powerful data intermediary poses risk not just to
consumers, but also to competition.
b. Geo-politically, a large number of 3rd parties in the space operate out taxation-lite /
neutral locations such as Singapore / Hongkong, but have strong ties / base in China.
Use of 3rd parties will increasingly be subject to geo-political scrutiny in a
data-localisation based regime preferred by certain governments as geo-political
strategy.
5. The re-use of standard tech-stack across multiple geographies also pose the risk of dumping
as tech that is outlawed / out-regulated in certain geographies will be dumped in markets
without similar protection. Prevalence of such dumpware poses clear threats to consumers as
they use tech that has clear issues that have been witnessed elsewhere is still put in use.
a. Example - Tongdun is a Chinese fintech company that operated in China, moved to
Indonesia when faced with challenges in Chinese regulation and have since moved to
India, again when faced with regulatory challenges in predatory practices. The re-use
of the tech infra is clearly spottable from Indian loan apps that communicate to
https://idfp.tongdun.net/ - a risk scoring instance setup for Indonesia originally.

3. App Metadata Analysis.
The app metadata obtained from playstore could be subject to analysis to derive various
insights. Some examples are included below of useful inferences where data could show
light and lead investigators to spot potentially harmful apps.
1. A view of privacy policy URLs and developer Website URLs can be useful indicators.
Privacy policy pages hosted on Google docs / sites / other static web hosting
services imply the digital lender doesn’t have a website of their own, is most likely an
informal player, by extension could be outside formal regulatory supervision / industry
self regulation. The privacy policy URLs could also reveal if the lender is using a
white label, their origin. https://apph5.ncreditapp.com/yinsizhengce.html indicates a
Chinese whitelabel provider behind the app.

2. Age of the app, number of versions can indicate if the app gets sufficient updates
necessary to keep it in sync with customer / market needs, technically safe and
sound. Any app that has not received an update in the last 3 months indicates the
entity behind is vulnerable to cyber risks.

3rd Party Digital infrastructures for lending
There are third parties who provide provider-level infrastructure, and ecosystem-level
infrastructure. Besides market led software stack for various components of digital lending
like KYC, alternate data, payments, increasingly a number of bank-led / ecosystem-led
digital infrastructures are being built to enable digital credit, actively furthered by regulators /
government. These technology infrastructures are designed to further machine-first,
data-driven lending for various use cases, often originally aimed at addressing data-access /
level playing field in the market for non-banks in the lending landscape.
While new technological infrastructure holds high potential for expanding financial access
and improving lending decisions, they also pose potential harms which must be considered
and addressed at their outset. Besides the generic harms arising out of algorithmic lending /
fairness in AI/ML systems and data-driven credit decisioning, use of these infrastructures
also enable adding a whole range of data-intermediaries into the lending value chain and
brings its own risk.

3

S.No

Infrastru
cture

Function

Opportunity

Risk / Consumer
harm

1.

Account
Aggregat
or3 (AA)

Consented financial
data sharing

Access to trustable,
systemic financial
data.

Heightened access to
systemic banking
information, leading to
higher demand for

https://datagovernance.org/files/research/1641969121.pdf Tech Tools to Facilitate and Manage
Consent: Panacea or Predicament? A Feminist Perspective - Jain Tripti - Data Governance Network.

data /
over-consenting for
credit access.
2.

Open
Orchestrated lending
Credit
via Loan Service
Enableme Providers
nt
Network
(OCEN)4

Furthers embedded
lending.

Newer forms of data
being tapped for
credit access and a
large number of
intermediaries.

3

* Public
Credit
Registry 5

Attempts to solve for
fixing thin-file credit
history regulatorily, at
population scale.

Lack of clear
individual insolvency
regime / clean-start
norms leading to
exclusion.

Credit Registry of all
debt

LoanApps Database Generator
The process of building the database of loan apps, getting a dump of metadata could be
automated using Google Play API and data analysis on the metadata could be used to
generate insights such as those mentioned above.
In addition, the list of apps could also be subjected to semi-automated malware analysis and
additional metadata related to 3rd parties could be generated and subjected to analysis,
deriving insights.

4

https://github.com/iSPIRT/OCEN Loan Service Provider (LSP) <-> Lender protocol specification
RBI: RBI likely to launch public credit registry next year, create a hub of borrowers' info, BFSI News,
ET BFSI - Public Credit Registry by the Indian banking regulator is expected to roll out in 2023-24
5

